GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
Judy Woodruff is on assignment.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Donald Trump's
money troubles. Hillary Clinton
outraises
him by tens of millions of
dollars and attacks
him as bad for the economy. His
defense? Just
you wait.
Also ahead this Tuesday:
Venezuela's desperation.
The country's deepening debt and
political
crisis pushes hungry citizens to
riot in search
of food.
And Making the Grade -- the
latest in our
weekly education series examines
how to turn
students into scientists by
ditching textbooks.
CHRISTY MATHES, Teacher, Sage
Valley Junior
High School: It's not the child
needs to memorize
these things. It's the student
needs to be
able to do some pretty intense
stuff. We are
actually doing the science.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Iran has closed its
largest deal
with an American company in over
three decades.
Airplane manufacturer Boeing
announced it's
signed an agreement to sell
commercial jets
to Iran Air, the country's main
carrier. Iran's
transportation minister said the
sale could
be worth up to $25 billion. It
marks Iran's
first major deal with a U.S.
company since
last year's landmark nuclear
agreement.
Attorney General Loretta Lynch
traveled to
Orlando today, as the Justice
Department pushed
ahead with its murder
investigation. Omar
Mateen killed 49 people at a gay
nightclub
there more than a week ago. This
afternoon,
Lynch visited a memorial at
Orlando's City
Hall. She signed a note of
condolence, and
stopped at a display of wreaths
honoring each
victim.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: The
message of Orlando that I have
seen today,
and what the American people
have seen in
the wake of this horrific
assault, is a message
of determination to remove
hatred and intolerance
from our midst, to live our
lives freely and
without fear and to stay true to
the principles
of liberty, justice and equality
that define
America at our best.
GWEN IFILL: Lynch said
investigators are still
working to determine whether
they missed any
warning signs that would have
confirmed Mateen
was a threat.
Maine Republican Susan Collins
led Senate
colleagues from both sides of
the aisle today
in unveiling a compromise on gun
control.
The measure, which would bar
anyone on the
government's no-fly list from
buying guns,
comes after the Senate rejected
four bills
from Republicans and Democrats
last night.
Collins said it was time to put
aside party
differences and end the Senate
gridlock.
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine:
All of us are
united in our desire to getting
something
significant done on this vital
issue. Surely,
the terrorist attacks in San
Bernardino and
in Orlando that took so many
lives are a call
for compromise, a plea for
bipartisan action.
GWEN IFILL: But Republican
Senator John Cornyn
of Texas, whose own proposal
failed last night,
cautioned that people on
government watch
lists who have not been charged
with a crime
shouldn't be denied due process.
SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R), Texas: I
remain concerned
about a provision on the back
end, after you
have been denied a
constitutional right. But
we will see how the votes come
out. I think
it's a slippery slope when an
American citizen
is denied a constitutional right
without forcing
the government to come forward
with some evidence
on the front end, as opposed to
leaving that
on the back end.
GWEN IFILL: The Senate could
vote on the gun
control compromise bill as early
as this week.
Longtime Pennsylvania
Congressman Chaka Fattah
was convicted today of
racketeering. A federal
jury found the 11-term lawmaker
guilty of
all the charges against him,
including fraud,
money laundering, and bribery.
Prosecutors
said Fattah routed federal grant
money to
nonprofits he controlled, so he
could pay
off debts from his failed
mayoral bid in 2007.
The 59-year-old Democrat will be
sentenced
in October.
The Obama administration today
OKed routine
commercial use of small drones,
after years
of grappling with rules to
govern them. The
Federal Aviation
Administration's regulations
mean operators can fly without
special permission.
The rules require drones to stay
within visual
sight -- visual line of sight,
no higher than
400 feet. Flights are prohibited
over unprotected
people, and pilots must pass an
aviation exam
at an FAA testing center.
The U.S.-led coalition today
reported only
a third of Fallujah has been
cleared of Islamic
State militants. That assessment
comes days
after the Iraqi government
declared victory,
and nearly a month after the
Iraqi army launched
its offensive there. Meanwhile,
in Syria,
activists said ISIS militants
have now retaken
all the territories in Raqqa
province that
it previously lost to Syrian
government forces.
British Prime Minister David
Cameron made
a last-ditch appeal to Britons
today, urging
them to vote to stay in the
European Union.
It came 48 hours ahead of
Thursday's referendum
to decide whether or not Britain
will remain
a part of the E.U.
Speaking in front of 10 Downing
Street, Cameron
warned leaving the bloc would be
irreversible.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: To
put it as clearly as I can, our
economic security
is paramount. It is stronger if
we stay. If
we leave, we put it at risk.
That is a risk
to jobs, a risk to families, a
risk to our
children's future, and there is
no going back.
GWEN IFILL: The latest poll
tilts narrowly
in favor of Britain remaining in
the E.U.,
but that support is dwindling.
Back in this country, strenuous
new physical
testing for Marine combat posts
are weeding
out most female recruits. That's
according
to new data obtained by the
Associated Press.
The Pentagon opened combat jobs
to women six
months ago. But about 86 percent
of female
Marine recruits, or roughly six
out of seven
women, failed the tests. That's
compared to
3 percent of men.
On Wall Street, stocks finished
the day with
modest gains after Federal
Reserve Chair Janet
Yellen said the Central Bank
will remain cautious
in raising interest rates. The
Dow Jones industrial
average gained more than 24
points to close
above 17829. The Nasdaq rose six
points, and
the S&P 500 added five.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Donald Trump's
campaign cash crunch; the
International Olympic
Committee upholds an Olympics
ban on Russian
track and field athletes;
revamping science
standards for more effective
classroom learning;
and much more.
The summertime phase of the
presidential campaign
got under way with news of a
striking fund-raising
gap between Hillary Clinton and
Donald Trump.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
He's written a lot of books
about his business.
They all seem to end at chapter
11.
(LAUGHTER)
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Democrat Hillary
Clinton returned
to the swing state of Ohio today
to take aim
at Donald Trump's business
record and economic
experience.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: You
might think that,
because he has spent his life as
a businessman,
he'd be better prepared to
handle the economy.
Well, it turns out he's
dangerous there too.
Just like he shouldn't have his
finger on
the button, he shouldn't have
his hands on
our economy.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Recent polls show
Clinton leading
Trump nationally, but the divide
is even bigger
when it comes to money, raised
and spent.
May fund-raising reports
released yesterday
tell the tale.
Clinton ended the month with $42
million in
cash on hand. By contrast, the
Trump campaign
reported it has $1.3 million.
That's less
than primary candidates Ted
Cruz, at $6.8
million, and Ben Carson, at $1.7
million.
They dropped out months ago.
Even Democrat Bernie Sanders,
who has not
formally ended his campaign,
still had $9.2
million at the end of last
month. Trump said
he is unconcerned about the gap
and will raise
more this month. He spoke by
phone on this
morning's "Today Show."
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
What I will do is just what I
did in the primaries.
I spent $55 million of own money
to win the
primaries, 55. Now, that's a lot
of money,
I mean, by even any standard. I
have a lot
of cash, and I may do it again
in the general
election.
GWEN IFILL: The Trump campaign
put out its
very first fund-raising e-mail
today with
a pledge from the candidate to
personally
match contributions up to $2
million over
the next 48 hours.
On the campaign trail, it was
business as
usual. Trump met with
evangelical leaders
meeting in Manhattan. In video
posted from
the private session, he raised
questions about
Clinton's Christianity, and he
cautioned attendees
that they should be careful how
they decide
who to pray for.
DONALD TRUMP: We can't again be,
again, politically
correct and say we pray for all
of our leaders,
because all of your leaders are
selling Christianity
down the tubes, selling the
evangelicals down
the tubes, and it's a very, very
-- it's a
very, very bad thing that's
happening now.
GWEN IFILL: Trump also said he
would continue
his criticism of Clinton with a
major speech
also in New York tomorrow.
For more on the growing campaign
divide on
money and ideology as the
outlines of the
general election take shape, we
turn to Matea
Gold, who covers campaign
finance for "The
Washington Post," and USA Today
Washington
bureau chief Susan Page.
Matea, Donald Trump says he's
just being lean
and mean. How much of that is
even conceivable?
MATEA GOLD, The Washington Post:
The problem
here is it's not just Trump that
he's raising
money for. It's the Republican
Party as a
whole, and in fact the entire
GOP down-ticket
ballot that's relying on his
fund-raising
to put money into the coffers of
the RNC to
finance a get-out-the-vote
operation.
I think Trump's reaction to the
fund-raising
report and the backlash was very
telling this
morning. He threatened to
actually just self-fund
and leave the party on its own
if GOP leaders
didn't rally around him and help
him bring
in the funds. And that's caused
an incredible
amount of alarm among Republican
strategists
today.
GWEN IFILL: And you have been
covering campaign
finance issues for a long -- a
while by now,
Matea. How unprecedented is
this, this gap?
MATEA GOLD: Well, Trump's
campaign is simply
unprecedented. And we have not
had a major
party nominee self-finance in
this way.
And up until the primaries, it
was less of
a question about how much cash
he had on hand,
because he was putting
substantial sums into
his campaign, at least in the
forms of loans
every month. That changed in
May, when he
only fronted his campaign an
additional $2.2
million, raised $3.1 million.
This is the
month where he effectively
clinched the Republican
nomination.
Those figures are very, very
small for summer
heading into the key summer
months.
GWEN IFILL: So when you clinch a
nomination,
the theory is that you unite the
money and
the money comes flowing it. But
that doesn't
seem to have happened, at least
not yet.
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Well, it doesn't come in unless
you ask for
it.
And one problem is that Donald
Trump has not
done the kind of meticulous
fund-raising that
every other presidential
candidate has done
when they clinch of nomination.
In fact, he
hasn't done -- this is part of a
piece. He
hasn't done the other things
that conventional
candidates have done since
clinching the nomination.
People look at this --
Republicans look at
this and say seven weeks in
which he hasn't
broadened his message. He hasn't
built up
the staff in key states, and he
hasn't raised
the money that he will need in
the campaign
that continues.
GWEN IFILL: Explain to people
why -- what
this money goes for, because you
could understand
someone saying, oh, she's just
fat and happy.
She doesn't need this money.
She's being greedy.
Instead, there's actual things
you pay for
with this money.
SUSAN PAGE: Well, you pay for
people, staffers
who are going to walk around key
states, identify
your voters and turn them out on
Election
Day.
You pay for TV ads. Hillary
Clinton and her
super PACs have now put on more
than $23 million
-- more than $23 million worth
of ads in eight
battleground states, compared to
zero spent
on campaign ads by Donald
Trump's campaign.
And that is setting an
impression.
These are mostly -- there's some
positive
ads. More of them are negative
ads. They're
setting an impression of Donald
Trump, and
he is not responding to it. So,
as the campaign
goes on, that impression gets
more and more
set and it becomes harder and
harder to change
it if you wait.
GWEN IFILL: Matea, let's talk
about Hillary
Clinton's $42 million. To the
extent that
he is not raising money, where
is she raising
money from?
MATEA GOLD: Well, last night in
New York,
Secretary Clinton had three
high-dollar fund-raising
events in conjunction with the
Democratic
Party.
This is a strategy she has
actually been pursuing
since last fall, when she formed
the earlier
and largest joint fund-raising
committee a
presidential campaign has ever
done with the
party. That has been a very
successful strategy
for her, helping bring in not
only small donations
to her campaign, but much-needed
large donations
into the DNC, which was
suffering from a long
debt they were holding.
So the DNC, while it has not
raised as much
money as the RNC this cycle,
it's getting
a big boost from Clinton's
campaign. That
is something that Trump is just
starting to
try to chip away at with the
Republican Party.
GWEN IFILL: And it's fair to say
after -- she
raised more last night in three
high-dollar
events than he has on hand right
now.
MATEA GOLD: I would imagine so.
And she has tapped into a very
active small-dollar
donor base. Really, after
getting a scare
from Senator Sanders, who
managed to really
finance almost all his entire
campaign with
small online donations,
Clinton's campaign
really upped up their efforts in
that area,
have brought in substantial
amount of money
online through small donations.
That's something that has
Republican strategists
scratching their head, wonder
why Trump has
not tried to do the same with
his supporters,
who clearly have the kind of
fervent support
for the candidate that could
translate into
a lot of money.
GWEN IFILL: Well, that support
is predicated,
in part, Susan, on the fact that
he's a millionaire
and has a lot of money and
throughout the
primary talked about how he was
paying his
own way.
But a lot of that paying his own
way were
loans. Right? So, we know --
there are two
things we discovered, which is,
he lent himself
some of that money, and the
other part is
that a lot of the money that was
spent went
to Trump's own companies.
SUSAN PAGE: That's right, to his
air -- for
the airplane, the Trump aircraft
that he uses,
toward the resorts that he owns,
or his companies
own, where he's used them for
news conferences
and for rallies.
So some of this money has gone
back to him.
Some of it, he's loaned. He's
sent mixed messages
on whether he's willing to put a
lot of money
into a general election. And you
see that...
GWEN IFILL: Isn't that part of
his appeal,
that I'm a rich guy and I'm not
going to reach
in your pocket?
SUSAN PAGE: And I can't be
bought. I'm not
going to...
GWEN IFILL: And I can't be
bought.
SUSAN PAGE: Yes. That's right.
Now, one thing that Republicans
will say is
that he hasn't done things in
the conventional
way this far, and he's gotten
the nomination.
It's -- I think it's true that
his core support
remains behind him, and maybe if
he appealed
to them for small donations,
maybe they would
come through.
But there is this sense of the
clock ticking.
We are just 20-some days away
from the Republican
Convention.
GWEN IFILL: Matea, you talked
about small
dollars. What about the big
dollars, the deep
pockets of people like Charles
Koch and the
-- who really helped Mitt Romney
and have
helped previous party nominees?
MATEA GOLD: Well, so it's a
really mixed picture.
The Koch network, which is a
very powerful
organization which really runs
its own sort
of shadow political party, it's
completely
focused on competitive Senate
races right
now and is staying out of the
presidential
race. There are some longtime
veteran party
fund-raisers who had signed on
and lent their
name to the Trump fund-raising
effort with
the RNC.
However, I have been told that a
lot of those
people are sort of signed on in
name only,
and there are sort of limited
amounts of impact
that they're able to have trying
to get people
signed up to bundle checks from
their friends
and family. So I think it's
really a mixed
picture right now.
GWEN IFILL: So, you're waiting
to see what
happens with the next campaign
finance reports
in June. That's what he said
today.
SUSAN PAGE: That's right.
And let's see what happens in
the polls, too,
because one of the surprising
things is, as
terrible a time as Donald Trump
has had the
last couple of weeks, he has not
-- Hillary
Clinton has only a small lead
nationwide.
And you had Quinnipiac polls
coming out today
that showed it basically tied up
in Pennsylvania
and Ohio, two key states.
And this gives Republicans some
hope that
with the shakeup in the Trump
organization,
the departure of Corey
Lewandowski as the
campaign manager, maybe Trump is
ready to
make some of the changes that
Republicans
really believe he has to make if
this is going
to be a competitive race.
GWEN IFILL: Susan Page of USA
Today, and Matea
Gold of The Washington Post,
thank you both.
MATEA GOLD: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Just last week, the
International
Association of Athletic
Federations, also
known as the IAAF, voted to ban
Russia's track
and field team from competing at
this summer's
Olympics in Rio de Janeiro
because of widespread
doping.
Today, the International Olympic
Committee
agreed, but added one
significant loophole.
John Yang has that story.
JOHN YANG: The IAAF decision was
unprecedented
in Olympic history. Russian
President Vladimir
Putin slammed it as unfair
collective punishment.
Today's move by the IOC seems to
send a contradictory
signal. On the one hand, the IOC
did uphold
the ban. But it also said that
Russia's track
and field athletes could
participate if they
pass follow-up drug tests
administered in
other countries.
There is a lot of confused
reaction to all
of this.
And to help us understand it
all, Christine
Brennan is back with us. She's a
sportswriter,
columnist and commentator with
USA Today and
ABC News.
Christine, this is very
confusing. On the
one hand, they uphold the ban,
and they say
that the IAAF was -- they
respected their
right to impose the ban. But
they also opened
the door for athletes to
compete. How does
this work?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN, USA Today:
Oh, it's going
to be confusion.
I have never seen -- I have
covered the Olympics,
John, for 32 years. I have never
seen anything
like this. We're six weeks out
from the Rio
opening ceremonies, and this
could be a situation
where we don't know who is
marching in under
the Russian flag or the Olympic
flag in terms
of athletes, track and field
athletes from
Russia, until they march in, in
the opening
ceremony.
This is a battle right now we're
seeing between
the IOC and the International
Track and Field
Federation. We have never seen
anything quite
like this.
JOHN YANG: Why is this going on?
Why are these
two organizations battling this
out?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Can I blame
it on Vladimir
Putin?
He -- Putin put an Olympics in
the middle
of nowhere, spent $51 billion --
billion with
a B -- dollars to do that. And I
think that
we're talking about an old boys'
network here,
very old boys' network, with the
IOC. Think
FIFA.
And Putin did them a big favor
to the tune
of $51 billion, John. And there
is no doubt
Putin has a voice and has a say
within the
International Olympic Committee.
If they had
just said no Russian athletes at
all, the
IOC has said this, which is what
the IAAF
has basically said -- the IAAF
has gone against
Putin.
The International Olympic
Committee has left
the door open a crack, and that
is all because
Putin bailed them out two years
ago.
JOHN YANG: And we should point
out that the
IOC publicly says they're doing
this because
the presumption of innocence of
these athletes
is being damaged.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Right, but --
right. We
weren't born yesterday in terms
of the politics
of international sport.
I will say this. The idea of
having clean
athletes at the Olympics, the
Russian system
is rotten to the core. That is
what we have
seen over and over again. The
World Anti-Doping
Agency saying you cannot trust
anyone who
has gone through the doping
system in Russia.
And so the idea of having --
finding clean
athletes, you would almost need
a time machine
to go back a couple years and
test them under,
say, U.S. or Western European
rules.
And because we can't trust the
Russian system,
and what they have been doing,
their doping
facilities, I don't know how
we're going to
-- they're going to get clean
results for
these athletes in six weeks. You
will see
someone, say, who ran the New
York City Marathon,
well, if they had a clean test
there, OK,
that's one.
But that's certainly wouldn't --
I don't think
would give us any confidence
that that athlete
has been clean for the last
couple of years.
JOHN YANG: So, do we know how
they're going
to try to prove their innocence
and how -- what
the IOC has in mind when they
say they have
got to pass these follow-up
tests?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: I think the
endgame here
is that they are going to want
to get some
Russian athletes into the
Olympics.
And, again, I know this sounds
like cloak
and dagger and like some kind of
Bond movie,
but I really think we're there
with this,
because of this incredible,
unprecedented
battle between these two
powerful organizations.
The fact that you have got the
track and field
athletes, you have also got
Russian swimmers,
John, and several others.
There's another
report coming out in mid-July
about the state-sponsored
systemic doping among the
Russian athletes.
So, at that point, you might
hear the cry
to have the Russian athletes be
completely
kicked out of the Olympic Games.
But that's only two weeks before
Rio. I think
what we could see happening is
many more Russian
athletes than we even think
about right now
being allowed in, only because
they're going
to run out of time to prove that
they're guilty.
JOHN YANG: We have got less than
a minute
left, and we have got all sorts
of issues
surrounding the Rio Olympics.
We're less than six weeks away.
You have the
Zika virus. You have got
questions about health
and safety down there. And now
you have got
this. Is there a big cloud
that's going to
be over these Games?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: There could
be unlike any
other Olympics.
Usually, there's always
something that you
think about, terrorism in Sochi
or terrorism
in Athens, a home game for the
terrorists
at the Olympics in Athens in
'04, and then
nothing bad happens.
The question here is maybe will
Rio be that
first Olympic city to be
consumed by the Olympic
Games? Because, as you said, so
many things
on their plate. And then you
throw in this
Russian controversy. And I hope
that's not
the case, but I think Rio might
really be
that first Olympic city to have
real trouble
hosting the Games.
JOHN YANG: Two months away. We
will see what
happens.
Christine Brennan, thanks so
much for being
with us.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Thank you,
John.
GWEN IFILL: Coming up on the
"NewsHour": Venezuelans
hit their breaking point as food
and resources
become scarce; addressing the
high population
of prisoners with disabilities;
and breaking
down the genius of Cole Porter's
most famous
songs.
But, first: For years, Common
Core academic
standards for math and English
have been the
subject of battles all over the
country.
But there's also a move afoot to
set new standards
for science as well, and a
number of states
are starting to adopt them
voluntarily.
Special correspondent John
Tulenko of Education
Week reports.
JOHN TULENKO: It takes just 10
minutes to
cross through Gillette, Wyoming.
This small
city sits in the northeast
corner of the state,
surrounded by hundreds of miles
of prairie.
But schools here in Campbell
County are on
the edge of something big, the
next generation
science standards.
CHRISTY MATHES, Sage Valley
Junior High School:
You are going to build a strand
of DNA, and
you are going to decode it and
figure out
what that DNA actually says.
JOHN TULENKO: For Christy Mathes
at Sage Valley
Junior High School, the new
standards are
about learning to think like a
scientist.
CHRISTY MATHES: There's a lot of
really good
stuff in them. Every standard is
a performance
task. It's not, the child needs
to memorize
these things. It's the student
needs to be
able to do some pretty intense
stuff. We are
analyzing, we are critiquing, we
are creating,
we are actually doing the
science.
JOHN TULENKO: Take today's
lesson on genes.
Mathes had her students pick
fictional character
cards with the name, height,
hair and eye
color of each character.
CHRISTY MATHES: This is a
secret. Just you
and your group know.
JOHN TULENKO: In teams, they
built a genetic
model of their character's
traits and then
the groups traded models.
CHRISTY MATHES: And then they're
going to
figure out who you had based on
what you code
for.
JOHN TULENKO: OK, so orange,
red, red represents
what?
STUDENT: She has blue eyes.
JOHN TULENKO: Blue eyes.
What did you grasp about
genetics from doing
this exercise today?
STUDENT: That there are so
different many
parts of genetics that go into
so many different
things. Something as small as
like the size
of a gene, it's really, really
small. It can
change drastically how your life
turns out.
JOHN TULENKO: Developed by the
National Academy
of Sciences and others, the next
generation
standards are more comprehensive
than what
teachers here had been using.
MICHAEL MAHONEY, Sage Valley
Junior High School:
You might have had a teacher
that liked a
dinosaur unit, and they threw it
out in the
2nd grade, and then the same
unit get taught
in the 3rd grade and in the 4th
grade, and
you're like, well, I know a lot
about dinosaurs.
JOHN TULENKO: Before the new
standards, middle
school teachers like Mike
Mahoney were left
to fill the gaps.
MICHAEL MAHONEY: I would always
have to start
at the -- like nobody knew
anything, at the
very beginning: What is science?
And it's
kind of tough to get into a lot
of the different
curriculum things that you want
to teach when
you have to spend so much time
just on the
basics.
JOHN TULENKO: The new standards
brought more
structure, spelling out for the
first time
what should be taught, grade by
grade, in
elementary school.
CHRISTY MATHES: Every 5th grader
is going
to have this experience. Every
4th grader
is going to have this
experience. Then those
kids come to junior high and
it's not a catch-up
game. You know, what did you
miss? What did
you get? What do I need to do?
They are always
building on what came before and
what comes
next.
JOHN TULENKO: In Wyoming,
Campbell County
is leading the way with these
standards, which
the state has yet to adopt
officially; 17
other states are already on
board, accounting
for an estimated 35 percent of
public school
students nationwide.
David Evans heads the National
Association
of Science Teachers.
DAVID EVANS, Executive Director,
National
Association of Science Teachers:
I think that
the most important reason for
developing new
standards is that we have
actually learned
a lot about the way children
learn. And children
learn science best by actually
doing it.
JOHN TULENKO: So far, there's
been little
pushback. Unlike the Common
Core, there aren't
yet state-level science tests to
hold schools
and teachers accountable, and
the federal
role has been different too.
DAVID EVANS: The federal
government and the
Department of Education really
hasn't had
anything to do with the next
generation science
standards. It's really just that
simple. There
have not been strong incentives
and there
hasn't been any arm-twisting.
JOHN TULENKO: But these new
standards still
have a long way to go.
DAVID EVANS: There's an
established line of
data right now that documents
the fact that
we're not spending very much
time teaching
science in elementary school.
JOHN TULENKO: Nationwide,
schools spend 143
minutes a day on math and
reading, but only
20 minutes on science. And
there's another
big concern.
DAVID EVANS: The majority of
elementary school
teachers don't feel comfortable
teaching science.
Most elementary school teachers
don't receive
a lot of preparation in science
itself or
in science education.
WOMAN: So how does the light
travel?
JOHN TULENKO: To help its
teachers, Campbell
County is using a federal grant
worth just
under a million dollars to
develop new lessons
for every grade.
Jamie Howe teaches 4th grade.
JAMIE HOWE, Teacher: I have
learned to step
back and let their exploration
take over.
And, before, you know, you would
always want
to help them and guide them and
tell them
what the answer should be. So I
have had to
learn to step back and let them
be in charge.
STUDENT: We got it.
JOHN TULENKO: That's Gillette, a
good-size
city for Wyoming. But the rest
of the state
looks more like this, tons of
open space and
very few people. That means the
schools out
here are often very small, and
they face a
unique set of challenges in
implementing next
generation science standards.
Wright Junior Senior High
School, 40 miles
south of Gillette, is a good
example. It has
some 200 students and only three
science teachers.
SARAH SEAMANDS, Wright Junior
Senior High
School: One guy teaches 7th and
8th grade.
One guy teaches 9, 10. I teach
11 and 12.
Have you guys converted Celsius
to kelvins?
JOHN TULENKO: Small schools like
Sarah Seamands'
can't support having specialists
to teach
just biology or physics. She has
to do it
all.
How many subjects do you teach
here?
SARAH SEAMANDS: I teach four
subjects. I teach
anatomy, chemistry,
environmental science,
and physics.
JOHN TULENKO: What's that like
for you?
SARAH SEAMANDS: It's
challenging. Some weeks,
I nail the chemistry and physics
and maybe
environmental science, and then,
my anatomy
class, I neglect them.
So then I got to do really
interesting things
with anatomy, and then my
chemistry class
kind of falls off. At least,
that's how I
feel.
JOHN TULENKO: With the new
standards, teachers
like Seamands will have to
change not in one
subject, but four.
SARAH SEAMANDS: They have just
told us it's
coming, that it's in -- it's on
its way, and
be prepared, because things are
going to change.
JOHN TULENKO: Ready or not,
Wyoming is on
the verge of adopting the new
standards statewide,
but with one big exception.
This is coal country, and
officials removed
language that had emphasized the
major role
of human activities, such as
fossil fuel combustion,
when teaching students about the
causes of
global warming.
DAVID EVANS: Changing the
standards to prevent
teachers from teaching what is
clearly scientifically
accepted documented information
is unfortunate.
But the practices of science and
the way that
science is done and teaching
students to be
able to go out and ask their own
questions,
collect the evidence, and know
how to engage
in a scientific argument is very
encouraging.
JOHN TULENKO: Today, Wyoming has
put its modified
standards out for public review.
They could
make it to the governor's desk
for approval
by late fall.
In Campbell County, Wyoming, I'm
John Tulenko
of Education Week, reporting for
the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: The fall in world
oil prices has
likely hit no country as hard as
it has Venezuela.
Once flush with cash, the
country is now in
crisis, with a collapsing
economy, skyrocketing
crime and inflation rates, and
major food
shortages, all this as the
government of President
Nicolas Maduro tries to maintain
control.
For more on this situation, we
turn to Nicholas
Casey of The New York Times, who
is reporting
tonight from Caracas.
Thank you for joining us.
So, Nicholas, give me a sense
about how long
this collapse -- it feels like a
slow-motion
collapse -- how long has it been
going on
and what has caused it?
NICHOLAS CASEY, The New York
Times: It's been
going on for a couple of years
now.
And it's been tied to the
collapse in oil
prices in Venezuela. Venezuela
gets almost
all of its revenue from oil. So,
when these
prices started to collapse, the
first thing
you saw was that some of the
foods started
to disappear, not in huge
quantities, but
enough that there were lines in
front of stores.
The electricity started to
disappear. There's
even problems with water right
now because
the government doesn't have the
money that
it needs. Now, what's happened
with the food
is that there has been so much
which has gone
at this point, that people are
starting to
get hungry.
And last week and the week
before, we saw
a wave of lootings of stores.
People basically
left these lines that they were
gathered in
and started to go directly into
the stores,
break down the doors, and take
things that
were inside.
GWEN IFILL: You say that the
lack -- the collapse
of the oil -- of oil prices
contributed to
this. How much was that tied up
with the collapse
in faith of this current
leadership, of President
Maduro? How much of one thing
creating the
other?
NICHOLAS CASEY: Well, it's not
just, as you
point out, the collapse of the
oil prices
which has caused what's happened
here.
There are other countries, like
Mexico and
Brazil, which have a lot of oil
revenues themselves,
and don't have the same problems
as Venezuela.
Venezuela and Maduro came after
years of what
a lot of economists say was
economic mismanagement
by Hugo Chavez, who totally
transformed the
economy here.
The government spent lots of
money, lots of
money, and didn't save much for
a time when
the price of oil wouldn't be as
high as it
was before. So, now Venezuela
finds itself
in the position where it needs
money. It doesn't
produce a lot of food. It needs
money to import
food, and it doesn't have
anything right now.
So, in the short term, it's the
price of oil
which has got us here. But in
the long term,
it's a lot of economic changes
that took place
in this country in the so-called
Bolivarian
Revolution that came from Hugo
Chavez.
GWEN IFILL: So, you are
witnessing food riots;
you are witnessing a lot of
economic angst
as well. Is there also hoarding
going on,
people who are just --
businesses or individual
merchants who are just keeping
it to themselves?
NICHOLAS CASEY: Well, that's one
thing that
the government is blaming on
what's happening.
Personally, as a reporter, I
have not seen
people have been able to hoard
large amounts
of food, because there's not a
lot of food
to find. The idea of being able
to hoard eggs
or sugar or rice seems almost
impossible,
given the amounts of these
things that are
arriving.
And even on an individual level,
there's a
lot of people who would love to
be able to
have a stash for the event that
they couldn't
get any more, but most people
are just thinking
of day to day, what they're able
to get.
GWEN IFILL: Are there any
efforts under way
by international organizations,
like Organization
of American States, to try to
intervene, to
try to help?
NICHOLAS CASEY: Well, yes, the
OAS is trying
to put pressure now on
Venezuela.
And it's more political pressure
right now.
There is an effort under way to
recall President
Nicolas Maduro, largely because
of all these
economic problems which the
country is having.
The government seems to be
trying to slow
the process down, or at least
fight it.
And what's happened now is that
the Organization
of American States is holding a
special meeting
this week to try to determine
whether Venezuela
is in violation of its
democratic charter.
Now, this could eventually
result in Venezuela
being kicked out of the OAS,
which is kind
of like a U.N. sort of body that
is in the
Western Hemisphere.
This would be an embarrassment
for Venezuela.
But in terms of changing the
situation with
how much food is here, that
doesn't get Venezuelans
very far. They're not going to
see suddenly
their eggs and rice on the
shelves because
of the political pressure that's
going on
against Venezuela from the
international community.
GWEN IFILL: You wrote in one of
your stories
that eggs used to be used for
celebration,
but now an egg is like gold.
Nicholas Casey of The New York
Times, thank
you for your reporting from
Caracas.
NICHOLAS CASEY: Thanks for
having me.
GWEN IFILL: Now to our series on
Broken Justice.
Tonight, we look at a part of
the criminal
justice system that tends to get
less attention,
prisoners with disabilities.
Judy recorded this conversation
yesterday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new report
breaks down public
data to outline the scope of the
issue.
It says more than 750,000 people
with disabilities
are behind bars in the U.S.,
including more
than half-a-million with
cognitive impairments,
at least 250,000 with mobility
problems, and
140,000 who are blind or have
vision loss.
The report was issued by a
nonprofit disability
group known as RespectAbility,
which also
hopes to cast a spotlight on
what happens
to individuals after they leave
prison.
Jennifer Laszlo Mizrahi is the
president and
CEO of this group, and she joins
me now.
Welcome to the program.
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI,
President and CEO,
RespectAbility: Thank you for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why was this
important for
you to focus on?
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI: Well,
this was a
great injustice, because what
you predominantly
see are individuals of color,
people who are
African-Americans, Hispanic, new
immigrants,
whose disabilities were never
appropriately
diagnosed or addressed.
I myself am somebody with a
disability. And
so I know it can be harder to
get ahead, but
if you are doubly disadvantaged,
if you have
multiple minority status, the
school-to-prison
pipeline is almost a direct
ticket.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I know I was just
looking at
some census data this afternoon.
People with
disabilities make up something
like 19, 20
percent of population overall.
But your report finds they are
over 30 percent
of people behind bars in this
country. How
did that happen?
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI: It
really happens
when young people who have
dyslexia or executive
function disorder don't get the
diagnosis,
don't get the accommodations
that they need
and they deserve in school.
They wind up getting in trouble,
getting suspended,
dropping out of school. They're
not graduating
high school and they're getting
in trouble
very early. So you can really
see the problem
only -- already almost predict
the outcome
when somebody is in the third
grade, if these
issues are not addressed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is one of your
arguments that
they were wrongly convicted?
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI: In some
cases, yes,
because, in some cases, what has
happened
is they have an intellectual
disability that
they don't understand the
charges that are
against them, and they have not
gotten the
legal -- the legal support that
they need.
And, in some cases, they're
very, very smart,
and they might be deaf. There's
all kinds
of situation where individuals
who are hearing-impaired
are not given the right language
supports
with ASL, American Sign
Language, so they
can defend themselves.
So, we have real injustice for
people who
are in jail, and there are
people who committed
crimes because their path to
success wasn't
in place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To what extent
are our jails,
our city jails, county jails,
and state and
federal prisons equipped to deal
with these
issues?
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI: They
are not even
remotely equipped to deal. And
most of it
is not equipment. It's actually
training.
It's awareness.
For example, somebody who lived
in a house
with lead paint poisoning,
somebody like Freddie
Gray, who is a case we're all
familiar with,
he didn't have the ability to
follow multistep
instructions.
And so, in school, people
thought he had behavior
differences, when it was really
learning differences.
And so he was suspended, and
then he didn't
complete school, and then he was
in and out
of the correction system.
And then when somebody like that
goes into
incarceration, again, lots of
complicated
instructions, and before you
know it, they're
in solitary confinement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To what extent
are either legislators,
are federal -- are the Congress
looking at
this issue, addressing it? You
and I were
just speaking about efforts
right now to look
at prison reform. But you were
saying disabilities
are not a part of that.
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI:
Unfortunately, the
data just has not been known.
It's sort of like the housing
crisis, where
all the data was sitting there
hidden in plain
sight, but nobody was looking at
it. It's
really this explosive bomb of
information
that no one was looking at.
So the new legislation that is
being proposed
does not address any of these
issues at all.
By the way, I do support these
prison reforms.
There are people who really
shouldn't be in
the prison system because of
their long sentences
for nonviolent offenses.
But you have got to have a
pathway to get
a job, because the way things
are now, these
individuals who leave
incarceration, they're
not literate, and they wind up
back in prison.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it is -- as
we said a moment,
it is part of the focus of this
report, what
these individuals with
disabilities face once,
if and when they are released.
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI: Right.
What you see is that
three-quarters of individuals
who are released from
incarceration -- and,
by the way, that's 600,000
people every single
year -- within five years,
three-quarters
of them are back in jail. The
system is broken,
and it absolutely must be fixed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How -- Jennifer
Mizrahi, how
do you -- how do you even begin
to get your
arms around this? What are some
steps that
you argue need to be taken
immediately and
in the near term?
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI: Well,
in terms of
thinking about when people
reenter the community,
you need to be ready to have
scaffolding for
success, so that people can get
a job, so
that they can get their
medication.
People with significant mental
health differences
who need medication to keep from
having psychotic
episodes leave incarceration
with no health
care, and therefore no medicine,
and then
it's not surprising that they're
doing something
that's putting them back in
jail.
So there's basic things on the
exit. There's
things you need to do for
accommodations while
they're incarcerated, especially
around literacy
and training, to help them build
those skills.
And then there is to ensure that
the prison
pipeline doesn't continue,
starting really
very much with early
intervention, particularly
in minority communities, to make
sure they're
getting the tools that they need
to succeed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How should people
think -- I
know there's been a lot of, of
course, publicity
about crimes of all sort that
get attention
in the news media all the time.
Public -- people
read about it and they hear
about it.
How do they understand and weigh
the difference
between a disability that is
causing someone
to do something to commit a
crime, and one
that where there's will involved
and a disability,
and it's something for which one
has to serve
time, must be held accountable?
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI: Well, a
crime clearly
is something that harms another
person. And
so if you're harming people,
then there has
to be something to be done.
Now, in many cases, you can go
to a mental
health treatment program or an
addiction program
or a work program. The
alternative sentencing
is really important, because
America has only
5 percent of the world's
population, but we
have 25 percent of the world's
incarcerated
prisoners.
It's incredible; 2.2 million
Americans are
currently incarcerated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jennifer Laszlo
Mizrahi, with
the group RespectAbility, we
thank you very
much for talking to us.
JENNIFER LASZLO MIZRAHI: Thank
you very much
for your focus on these issues.
GWEN IFILL: Cole Porter left a
legacy as one
of the nation's finest composers
and songwriters.
He was born in Indiana 125 years
ago this
month.
To celebrate, Jeffrey Brown once
again joined
composer and musicologist Rob
Kapilow at Signature
Theatre in Arlington, Virginia.
It's the latest in our
occasional series on
what makes great music great.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rob Kapilow,
welcome back.
ROB KAPILOW, Composer: So great
to be here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Cole Porter this
time, OK,
so you have picked one of his
most famous
songs, "You're the Top!"
ROB KAPILOW (singing): You're
the top. You're
the Coliseum.
Who could forget that?
JEFFREY BROWN: You're the
Coliseum, it shows
he's a man known for the
sophistication of
his language, right, the sort of
high-Brown,
but low-brow as well.
ROB KAPILOW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: And for the
songs, because
he did both.
ROB KAPILOW: He did both, but
the truth is,
though he's really famous for
these incredibly
witty, sophisticated lyrics with
these erudite
rhymes and imagery, it's
actually the way
they combine with the music that
makes it
so unforgettable.
And people often underestimate
how crucial
the music is to those famous
lyrics.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, how does it
work in this
song?
ROB KAPILOW: So, let's take the
most famous
one, "You're the Top!" the
opening one.
Now, it seems like who could
possibly ruin
that great lyric? I mean, it's
got an exclamation
mark. "You're the top!" But let
me ruin it
for you.
OK. He could have written this.
(singing): You're the top.
Now, I mean, the lyric stays the
same. My
version simply leapt one octave
to the same
notes. He leaps one note higher
to this great
dissonance, but then a full
octave higher,
this huge leap. It's a leap up
to the top.
And in a way, that leap, all the
energy of
the leap and the dissonance
already tells
us what "You're the Top!" is
about before
we have heard a single note from
the voice.
COLE PORTER, Musician (singing):
You're the
top. You're the Coliseum. You're
the top.
You're the Louvre museum.
JEFFREY BROWN: This song, it's
not a story,
right, because not much happens.
It's just
him -- over and over again,
you're the top,
in different language. But
you're saying it's
also in different music.
ROB KAPILOW: It's the music that
makes the
language so witty, just that
difference.
It could have been after this
leap, all even
notes, you're the top. But,
instead of square
on the beat, you're the top,
it's syncopated,
not just the top, you're the
top, but even
you're. You're the top.
And it's that swingy rhythm that
tells us
what you're the top feels like.
So instead
of a boring version, you're the
top, it's
the music that makes it --
you're the top.
That's what makes it so
fantastic.
JEFFREY BROWN: And he was one of
these composers
who did both music and lyrics.
ROB KAPILOW: He did do both the
music and
lyrics, and that makes people
tend to think
that somehow it really matters
which comes
first.
It's the most frequently asked
question of
all songwriters. Which comes
first, the music
and the lyrics?
JEFFREY BROWN: Of course.
ROB KAPILOW: It makes no
difference. In a
great song...
JEFFREY BROWN: No difference?
ROB KAPILOW: No difference
whatsoever.
In a great song, once words and
music combine,
they become a new, completely
interdependent
element. Words cease to have a
purely literary
meaning, and music ceases to
have a purely
musical meaning. Though it's
true, these are
enormously sophisticated lyrics,
without the
music, they would never work,
and the last
line of this first verse is a
perfect example.
I mean, it's everything that
people think
of when they think of Cole
Porter. You have
got these three great images.
So, what are
you? You're a Bendel bonnet.
That means a
bonnet from that upper-class
women's store,
Bendel's. You're a Bendel bonnet
and a Shakespeare
sonnet.
The first thing that makes it
great is this
syncopation. He goes, you're up,
Bendel bonnet.
The same thing for Shakespeare
sonnet.
COLE PORTER (singing): You're a
Bendel bonnet,
a Shakespeare's sonnet. You're
Mickey Mouse.
ROB KAPILOW: So what do we
finish with? You're
Mickey Mouse, incredibly
low-brow, popular
in the '30s, introduced in 1928.
And it's that combination of the
syncopation
and the music underneath that
makes these
witty, sophisticated lyrics
unforgettable.
(singing): You're a Bendel
bonnet, a Shakespeare
sonnet. You're Mickey Mouse.
And then the piano almost speaks
to you.
(singing): Yes, you're Mickey
Mouse.
And we're back for another round
of great
Porter.
JEFFREY BROWN: This goes to what
we often
talk about, what makes a great
song, right?
ROB KAPILOW: Yes. What makes a
great song
is not the great words and it's
not the great
music. It's the combination of
the two. Words
mean nothing by themselves.
Music means nothing
by themselves. The two reinforce
themselves
and become a new unit that
cannot be understood
separately. And in Porter's
case, he wrote
both and they are both great.
JEFFREY BROWN: Cole Porter.
Rob Kapilow, thanks.
ROB KAPILOW: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Now an on-air peek
at our new
online series, "ScienceScope."
In the first episode, "NewsHour"
science producer,
Nsikan Akpan, delves into the
world of smells,
and how every sniff we make
changes odor itself.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Whoa. What's that?
It looks
like a space alien puked.
Can you guess what it is? That
is an odor,
or at least what an odor looks
like. Odors
are normally invisible, swirling
around us.
But I will tell you the secret
behind why
you can see this one.
Hey there. My name is Nsikan
Akpan, and you
have landed upon the first
episode of "ScienceScope."
Here, we will put science itself
under a microscope,
showing you how amazing
discoveries are made
and the people behind them.
First up, these trippy looking
waves. This
smell-scape is brought to you by
high-powered
lasers, a gigantic tank of water
and this
guy.
JOHN CRIMALDI, University of
Colorado at Boulder:
You can learn more about this
problem from
sitting and looking at something
like this
than just anything else.
NSIKAN AKPAN: That's John
Crimaldi, an engineer
and fluid mechanist at the
University of Colorado,
Boulder.
His lab studies how smells move
through space.
Do they drift like clouds or
curl like smoke,
or do smells have another shape
altogether?
The answers will lay the
foundation for a
nationwide project that is
studying how animals
and humans use smells to map
their surroundings.
JOHN CRIMALDI: If we have
situations where
we want to detect, say, a
location of a chemical
weapon, or if we want to try and
find hidden
contraband, or if we want to
find somebody
that's trapped under the snow in
an avalanche,
the tools we use in the 21st
century to do
this are animals.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Or people.
And that puts both at tremendous
risk. Crimaldi
and his colleagues want to
outsource this
risk to robots by teaching them
how to smell.
That sounds pretty wild, I know.
But think
about it. We have machines to
replace our
other senses, such as cameras
with facial
recognition or implants to
restore our hearing,
but we don't have similar
technology for smell.
Step one is learning how air
carries odor
into our noses. Air isn't
static, as you might
think. It's turbulent, like a
river.
JOHN CRIMALDI: One of the ways
of thinking
about turbulence is, it's a
collection of
rotating pieces of fluid that
people often
called eddies.
And there's bigger eddies. And
inside those
eddies are smaller eddies. But
point is, is
that flow is structured. It's
not -- it has
an element of randomness, but it
has a high
degree of structure.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Smells are tiny
chemical molecules
that get swept around by
turbulent air. But
these odors can also travel
underwater, where
creatures like fish and hermit
crabs can smell
them, too.
JOHN CRIMALDI: And it turns out
that the physics
of flows in air and flows in
water are exactly
the same.
NSIKAN AKPAN: So, Crimaldi's
team measures
these odors underwater. They
start by pumping
5,000 gallons of water through a
50-foot-long
tank. Next, they spread laser
light into a
sheet that slices through the
water, and then
finally comes the dye.
JOHN CRIMALDI: And so what we're
doing is,
we're using a special kind of
dye as a surrogate
for the odor. And this dye has
exactly the
same types of properties that an
odor would
have if it were in this flow,
but it has a
special property that, if we
shine a laser
light on it, then it's
fluorescent.
NSIKAN AKPAN: What they find is,
odor moves
like taffy. It's constantly
being pulled and
stretched into thin filaments.
If you have ever caught a whiff
of a bakery
when you walk down the street,
you have picked
up a filament. In some areas,
odors get dragged
away, leaving a blank space.
This blank space
is called intermittency. Small
disturbances
like a quick sniff are the tugs
in the smelly
tug of war.
Here's a demonstration built by
Crimaldi's
team. A tube is standing in for
an animal's
nostril. So, now breathe in. Now
exhale. And
you create an olfactory cyclone
that changes
want structure of the odor
plume. So whenever
you're in a garden and you stop
to smell the
roses, just remember that every
sniff you
make is changing the aroma for
someone else.
I'm Nsikan Akpan, and this is
"ScienceScope"
for the "PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Check our Web site
in July for
Nsikan's next installment of
"ScienceScope."
Later tonight, be sure to check
out the first
of a three-part series on the
history of ancient
Greece and its people, from
cavemen to the
rise of Western civilization.
Produced by
National Geographic Studios for
PBS, "The
Greeks" traces the journey of an
ancient civilization,
as historians, archaeologists,
scientists
and artists explain how the past
shapes the
future. It premieres tonight and
continues
over the following two Tuesdays
on most PBS
stations.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.